hello everybody it's a pleasure
to welcome you to the
carter journalism institute
here at nyu
i see a lot of people who i don't know
so i'll introduce myself and
tell you really briefly what you're in
for today
i'm dan fagan and i'm a professor here
and i'm the director of the science
health and environmental reporting
program which is one of the graduate
programs here at nyu
we've been around for
29 years
in fact there are some prospective
30s in the audience and that's a big
big
big move for us to go to
our third decade
one of the things we do is that we have
evening sessions uh four times a
semester typically
and they are organized by lee hoats
robert lee hoax who is a science
reporter at the wall street journal
and a distinguished writer in residence
here at the carter institute
and lee finds amazing people for us
and he has a really uh struggled today
with siddhartha and mukherjee
we are absolutely thrilled to have sid
here with us
uh he has somehow managed to find time
for us in between
oh running doing top-level research and
seeing patients full-time and
oh incidentally writing one of the 10
best books of the year uh
he has somehow found time to see us and
we're very grateful for that so i'll
leave it to lee to formally introduce it
but i'll just say directly
how happy and
grateful that you are willing to join us
uh
with that i will turn it over to
leigh house uh
take it away professor
thank you professor
so welcome inside out
our purpose here this evening for those
of you who've never had a chance to join
us before is to
linger for a while
on an example
of
the best in american science and medical
writing and with the consent and the
connivance of the author of that work
dissect it uh take
it
as a
stellar example of craft
um from which we can all learn um i
should say at the outset that this is a
conversation not a lecture um
and that i uh both encourage and insist
on your interruptions uh what makes for
the best kind of
insight out
is a digression that is prompted by
someone who uses the microphone that dan
has got so if you'd like to ask a
question just get his attention so that
we can capture
that for people who might want to watch
this later on the web um
we live
uh in a golden age of science and
medical right uh i think it's uh you
have to go back to the lab to the to the
19th century to find a time
when
the
literature of the laboratory
of the clinic
played such a big
role in popular reading and
unlike our current professional
writing culture
there is a a rich
tradition of practitioners and
scientists themselves
being the ones who write eloquently
about
new developments directly for the public
one
of course is the prime example of this
but it used to be the main channel of
communication from the laboratory
to the public and in recent years we've
really seen a revival of this partly
through the dynamics of
the publishing business partly through a
renewed
interest of the general public and
partly because a generation of unusually
eloquent uh and energetic practitioners
and scientists have come to the fore who
themselves write brilliantly we're very
very fortunate this evening that we have
one of those people with us tonight
siddhartha booker g thank you for
joining us
a
officially an assistant professor of
medicine at columbia university uptown
and he's also a staff
cancer physician at the columbia
university medical center
he is also author of the book that we
are here to discuss this evening
the emperor of all maladies a biography
of cancer this is a book that
has been
named by the new york times as one of
the 10 best books
of 2010
one of the top 10 non-fiction books by
time magazine and in that
laying on of hands that all authors
today uh seek and are blessed to receive
named
by oprah
as one of her top 10 books of 2010.
what we're going to do normally we talk
to a journalist we talk to a a uh a
person who's whose
main practice is is uh writing
but occasionally we do like to look at
this
and we're informed by this from the view
from the other side of the fence in the
in past seasons we've been fortunate to
have uh nobel laureate frank wheelchair
for instance
uh nobel laureate hoffman come talk
about their efforts to communicate
directly
about their particular research
obsessions to the general public
what's unusual i think about this book
and about you as a
as a writer is that you are
not um
putting out your theory of how this
works you're not uh
giving us your version of the higgs
boson that you're chasing or whatever
you have actually kind of tackled the
history and the character of a medical
field and uh that on the one hand is a
very ambitious but it's so uh selfless
if i can put it in such a funny way so
let's explore for a minute your pedigree
is a writer
now i know that uh
you come
to your current position through
stanford where you were an undergraduate
there you you vote for the stanford
daily yeah now you've written
as a
generalist for the new england journal
for nature book reviews um but you know
when i was preparing for this i couldn't
help but notice that prior to this
current book the
the writing that you've seen more
in
in tune with
was the classical
peer-reviewed medical literature i just
pulled this one at random
paper published earlier in your career
urine cytotoxic the lymphocytes
recognize an epitome in an ebna-1
fragment but failed lies eba and a1
expressing mouse cells this this is not
the kind of pro style that gets you up
to the top 10 list so i wonder if you
could just uh start our conversation
tell me a little bit about your pedigree
as a writer your pedigree is a doctor
well documented you know stanford
harvard colombia um the new england
journal
how did you develop as a writer i'm told
you used to memorize great poetry when
you were young is that where it starts
i think it i think it starts with an
interesting story and i talked about
that actually in this book uh very much
so
it starts off with
i think
i think if i have as you're pointing out
i have no theory to explain that only
one theory responds to our writing which
is
uh
good writing
comes from good reading
and so
i think of myself primarily as a reader
and i
tried to incorporate all that into this
into this book
i think
one of the things that's interesting to
me in the writing of this book in
particular
was that long before i knew the content
of this book
um i knew it's moved
i needed to look yeah i just had a sense
of what i mean i was thinking about
writing this book it was obviously an
ambitious project i'd never done
anything like this before um
the content was so enormous i mean just
this last year there were 300 000 books
published a 300 000 journal articles
published on cancer so you can see
there's sort of like a fire hose of
information coming at you and your job
and my job in writing like this was to
try to get at
um
hitting the height getting the main
important pieces of that information but
long before
all of that happened i spent a lot of
time thinking to myself what
what should one
feel like
uh in inhabiting this book
and uh one the real the reader yeah
what's the real real life and i
gravitated to a couple of books that
were very important for that uh for that
and i learned from them you know
really i spent a lot of time i read and
we read those books and looked up a
little bit about them in more detail i
was particularly interested in richard
rhodes book
i was very struck by that you you
mentioned that in your acknowledgments
and yes lots of medical books and then
suddenly this
famously
well done history of the making of the
atomic bomb
in detail about what exactly so there
was richard rose which i thought was
particularly interesting to me
then there was uh i'll mention four
books and they're very different and
that's again trying to capture the
set of relationships here the second
book was tony judd's book which had just
come out from only what that friend is
friend
called post-war um
the third one
is the one that's perhaps most in the
left field but the one that i've
probably returned to the most often
formally
and that is primo levy's book
and then finally
a book that is with large through this
book but in fact a book that i
don't borrow very much from formally
which is susan sontag's uh illustrator
so there were sort of four books and you
can imagine there's sort of four books
in mid-space i
i have a
i have a very peculiar
personal manner of writing which is i i
figured this out
when i was starting out this book i
um i thought i bought myself a very nice
desk and a beautiful chair um and i set
myself up by the window and i said you
know this wasn't dangerous i was i was
in harvard then and i sent myself a
window and i spent hour after hour
writing absolutely nothing and when i
wrote them it was complete junk um
and so then i moved downstairs to the
living room and i sat so i set myself up
there i wrote nothing again
so finally after five or six such
attempts i end up in bed
and i wrote my entire book in bed
i would you know literally i would put
all these books underneath my so richard
all these books would be stacked
underneath the bed i could reach into
them and pull them out um and on
mornings like everyone else would go off
to work and i would be sort of like the
person in pajamas writing in bed you'd
have to ask him did your wife have
feelings about your parenting event into
like your work area here you're you're
you're not only in your library i mean
would you just like stack books on your
house
last year in nature and so forth so and
i realized to myself that if you know if
if that what works don't fix it so
um i i just recently moved my office to
colombia and for the first time in my
life i was given the luxury of you know
choosing things for my office people's
shoes desks and chairs and so forth and
so i moved to bed
i can't believe that you
i mean it's folded up for the most part
more serious points you know went
back back to the point of richard spoken
right to the point of so i i i had
something oh i borrowed something from
richard about
the way he enters this book again in a
very selfless manner
he has the contemplative quality of
of someone observing an enormous moment
in history a moment in history that you
know it truly defines the beginning of
the atomic ages for us but yet his touch
in that book is so sparing
that it's unbelievable it's almost like
it's almost like you can move to the
entire world that
people might realize that with the
opening the opening page of that book
it is a real masterwork in in just being
the way it's crafted it brings you to a
moment in history uh where leo zillard
is stepping off a curve in london and
that um that little thing
that happens those are large steps of
the curve of course becomes
such a large metaphor because it is in
fact mankind that's stepping on it right
but you don't realize that at the first
moment in that book this is before the
atoms were split um
and
just taking you into this pre-atomic
world this naive innocent
world before atomic weapon before we
unreached the power of the atom i was
thinking about this more recently
because what's happening in japan
um so that was one thing about a tongue
a tone exactly a toner a kind of
contemplative tone a
kind of
deeply deeply crafted since he really
wanted to find out every little piece
what was the intersection between
whatever bloomsburg bloomsbury avenue
and sharpsbury avenue what is it like to
be there what is it like to visit there
that kind of term to inhabit to bring to
that place um and then in contrast and
again just in the stark contrast and yet
achieving the same effect any one of the
people who've read primo levy's book
again that book is
motivated by tone the tone that that's
very important to me in that book is
is survival in auschwitz is a cool book
um
it's a very cool book and yet it's it's
precisely
the temperature of the book that reminds
us how deep um how the depth of what is
happening here i mean this is really the
one of the quintessential terms
of
um
suffering in the camps right again i
don't make an idiotic analogy between my
book
it's about the nationals but the more
interesting thing to me was
how does one
as a writer achieve that place
where you can convey information
in a way that encourages a kind of
dialogue almost with the reader
um
but it does so in a sparing way uh in a
way that's
that's not you know it's interesting i
would often reread sentences from either
richards or or
primo's book and i was wondering if
there are three words that are changed
in that sentence the entire tone of that
sentence would change entire tone of the
book will change so how does one create
how does one then create that term so
this is a very long way of saying that i
had first imagined the tone of my book
the mood of my book long before i had
imagined the content of the book
and that was my first set well you
clearly from the outset made a very
interesting decision about
this book which is to cast
what is in fact a history of
the study experience of cancer from
prehistoric times well 2500 bc or so uh
to the present uh not as a history not
as a uh technical adventure story of uh
but as a biography of a disease um what
was your idea there well so you know
there were
that is a complicated uh
as you can imagine particularly for a
scientist that is a complicated
uh
that is a complicated step and by that i
mean the following i mean um using the
word biography in the context of disease
always brings up the specter or a
scientist
of over a thrombomorphizing disease
illness
and yet on the flip side i can say to
myself well am i patients my patients
encounter illness particularly when they
encounter cancer it happens to be
illness that i'm not familiar with um
they do imagine uh themselves uh
inhabiting as who
very much put it as becoming citizens of
another country um
visiting another kingdom you know the
opening quote
in a second
their imagination is one of it is a very
visceral imagination it's not an
imagination of history it's an
imagination of inhabitation inhabit a
different place someone
they they imagine illness in a very very
visceral and they said way and so i said
to myself you know if that's the case
then why
why eat around the bush about it why not
then call this book spoken biography
because in general of course
the original subtitle of the book was a
history of cancer
it just didn't feel right to the project
it didn't feel appropriate to the
project in other words
historians generally don't tend to enter
their own histories
but they generally don't tend to the
project seemed too visceral and in the
end
i kept thinking to myself you know i'm
drawing a portrait of something over
time i'm calling a portrait of breast
cancer
in 1850 and the same portrait again in
1890 the same portrait again with
changes in 1910 in 1950 200 in 2000
and that is a biography you know this
idea of repeatedly revisiting the same
corporate the idea the imagination of
breast cancer in this in this particular
case and so i said finally at the end
actually the the
subtitle history had persisted right
through the
penultimate draft and then i i changed
that in the end and said you know
to me this project feels more like
as i said biography
that that that
that change that shift
was and continues to be criticized uh
some people don't like that but people
don't like the idea of recasting this as
biography um and i i think that that
leads to an interesting conversation
usually so i sort of put it out there as
as as a more as more provocative
well i thought it did a very it had a
very interesting effect i mean
cancer as a topic um
as a condition uh as a cultural metaphor
i mean is it it's very high pitched it's
very charged and there's a very high
level of propagandizing that that goes
on
which you
delve into in some portions of your book
when you're talking about the last
expression
i thought that by casting this biography
had had the the effect of somehow taking
that down a notch
and allowing
a certain distance
that was informative so
introduce us to this character
that you're writing a biography
introduces
this team of people goes out to hunt the
song
and
care of one pair of lost somewhat mad
poems
with all sorts of mathematical
inferences inside the poem but anyway
and in the end
the snark that they're everyone's going
out to hunt
basically ranches into nothing it
becomes a hunt becomes a kind of futile
plant um and to some extent i think some
of them actually use that in the book
it happens
to cancer
in the 1940s 1910s we imagine that there
is one monolithic entity called cancer
big c cancer for which there will be one
monolithic legacy cure
with one medicine
or one series of medicines called family
medicines and as we enter the the actual
history that will fade away the gun
begins to become infinitely more
slippery
and that to me is very interesting as an
idea and what does one do
in the face of that uncertainty how do
we respond not only as patients but as
advocates as doctors or scientists to
something that begins to now diversify
so enormously that it begins to become
not just one disease but many diseases
and we now know that one breast cancer
doesn't resemble a second breast cancer
so the fact that they happen to rise in
the same anatomical organ belies a
incredible degree of difference and yet
of course if you check the family of
breast cancers there's some deep
resemblances between them uh compared to
the family of
prostate cancer it's a little bit
becomes like recognizing the human face
right i mean we know that there's
certain fundamental features of an
attribute that connecting faces and
obviously we know that faces often
becoming families and yet the family of
one face has no resemblance to the
family on another case and yet we can
have a reasonable conversation with what
it faces right so so
some of that begins to happen with
cancer and to me what was interesting is
in the face of that in the face of that
uncertainty in the face of that that
adversity what is the response
some of the responses to grapple with
simplicities to grapple with again the
vc cure some other responses are you
know to try to look for these
underlying themes so
we answer your question what is the what
is the characteristic of this cancer
this thing this entity cancer
um it isn't it is it is infinitely
slippery it begins it starts off as one
thing but by the end of the book we
realize it's quite something different
culturally it's different metaphorically
it's different and most importantly
biologically
how did this project originate for you i
mean uh i'm i'm very struck for instance
to hear you say that the idea of
capturing a biography being almost at
the end of the project rather than as an
initial organizing principle because
frankly it's a neat um
but uh
you know your prolific uh run a prolific
lab um you have papers coming out all
the time i'm sure you've got the post
docs nagging at you you have uh patience
cancer patients who are
may claim
their mortality the claim on your time
where did this come from
well i mean
one major emphasis was that there was a
i felt that while i was a fellow in
training i thought it was a big vacuum
in this literature i mean there was a
kind of uh
you can go onto a bookstore you could
look on amazon there are 5 000 books on
cancer
but the kind of book they were it was
the kind of book that i was least
interested in reading myself
you know eat sugars and then for colon
cancer or some nonsense like that
and
and so i felt as if
this vacuum was
and sophisticated readers uh i think we
sort of almost owed something to
patients because here they were asking
extremely sophisticated questions uh
you could say that
one culture here our culture is asking
very sophisticated questions during
listing questions cancer what is cancer
what happens next where where are we now
what happens next how do we get here
is cancer increasing is it decreasing
are we dying more cancer are we dying
lots of cancer are there more
carcinogens than less carcinogens these
questions are are deeply part of our
public conversation and yet
there was a i felt that there was very
few attempts to sort of take a step back
and say well what is the story what is
the larger story behind these
sort of conversations that are happening
in a in a kind of uh super stratum as it
were what is this what is the deeper
structure what is the history and then
patients actually began to ask me this
question these questions you know
someone during an interview on the
treatment of breast cancer would say
well how did we how did how do we ever
know that tamoxifen works how do we get
to this point
or someone else would ask you know who
discovered x y or z right um
and i felt as if all of this could be
there was a story behind all this was a
connection with the series of links um
and so i began to keep a journal um
uh often recording these questions that
circles around them and come back to
them and so forth and then by the end of
my first year fellowship i ended up with
almost
four to four diaries of notes
these are just a conversation with
yourself right kind of an internal
conversation
not not a diary you know no not very big
kind of traditional sense um
and so then i began to sort of wonder if
i tried this
you know four or five notepads worth of
diaries um
how how does one put this together what
was the what would the next series of
steps that will convert this into a into
into this into a document that is really
a story for the beginning the middle and
end
uh or something
about and that's otherwise improved okay
well you know we're doing some craft
here so so i'm wondering this is very
interesting
that you kept a kind of open-ended uh
journal yeah
did you then turn this into a proposal
to get an agent how does it work from
from your side you're not
you know a nobel laureate uh yet uh
you
are
not unlike us here um
a a writer starting out uh with a day
job
trying to find
somebody to get interested in what is
not a beginning project this is a this
is a fairly massive undertaking you're
thinking about how did how did you frame
this as a as a business proposal i mean
it's a proposition
i'll give you two i'll give you two
points about that first of all uh the
first point is about writing as an
expert versus a non-expert it's very
very important to write this book for me
as a non-expert i could not have written
this book as a novel or just to use one
example but to you but if i had a kind
of uh
inflated sense of seniority
in writing this book i think
this book would be i would be physically
unable to write this book this would
book would not would not come out the
way they did um there is something about
i think the
i hope there's something about not
propounding
a fear not having an ego too i mean i
have my own ego i'm saying that i'm evil
as i'm saying but not having a
particular agenda to grant
which allows this kind of book to happen
again this goes back to the books that i
was talking about you know richard who
was not casting himself out to be
the the new historian of
the atomic age right he was writing a
book very specifically about
uh the making of the atomic bomb which
happens to tell us
that you know what
right but just for the sake of
discussion rose is a historian and he's
not a nuclear physicist yes he's you
know he's not a richard fineman he's not
a robert i'm not he's not an iranian
he's not in there right uh
uh playing the game he's like he's an
onlooker yeah now you're you're you're
doing both you are in there as an
oncologist as a researcher as a
practicing physician um but most
importantly i'm not richard pines
well you know there are times when i
think richard feynman
wasn't richard
right
but but most of all i'm not you know
they said the the gays as it were was
not one of an expert gays was one of
discovery i was more interested in
discovering my history rather than
narrating to you what my history was
and that's also discovery was important
i'll come back to some specific
instances of that in a sense um the
second question is how does one do this
practically
mechanically
so it turned out that i was
even though i was producing stuff in bed
i was unable to write the proposal
absolutely
because every time i would write a
proposal i would try to say to my try to
say to someone who's going to read this
proposal you know this is how i intend
to write this movement
so it was like you know imagine it was
like it was it was one step away from
the actual writing of the book it was
telling someone this will be the content
and to me that felt very empty partly
because i happen to have written books
or sorry i haven't written articles
about you know in science you don't ever
tell someone this is my
future theory
about something of the other right
if someone takes if you read an article
that says this is my future theory that
goes straight into the trash can
so you have to it's it's it's a do and
tell it's not you know it's not you know
you can't you show and you do and you
don't
you don't expound about what you are
able in future to be able to do or
possibly might exist in the future which
is essentially what the proposal is so i
struggled and i struggled with it and
then someone gave me into my agent gave
me some very good advice
and um
that was sarah chelsea who works with
andrew wiley
and
who's been amazing you know both
england's are amazing readers and sarah
said you know what if you're struggling
so much just write the book just start
writing the book and when you feel as if
you are
ready that's your
attend something at the end of it but
that's your proposal so instead of
spending hours on hour one hour writing
a book about a book that i was going to
write
i just started writing a book that i was
actually how long did you track around
before you kind of got to this
weeks and weeks
and then i started on page one and uh
and in fact what's interesting is i'll
talk a little bit about some changes
start page one and i wrote about
300 odd pages uh in you know i didn't
tell anyone about it uh
cleared on things of the real book
and then approached
uh people uh paintings as our publishers
uh uh about it and in bed writing the
300 pages this is like with a laptop
yeah i i use it i'm i'm you know we
we like to think that we invent new
technology in the lab but being
in that position i'm also incredibly
technologically attractive
yeah i can barely have had movies you
know there's a there's this article
that's on my recently about early
adopters so i'm like i'm the later
doctor
so i had a laptop which i adopted to
eventually but i still used pen paper i
still like pen paper so i kept my you
know my recurring notes
so you're writing this you're in bed
you're on a laptop yes um you freed
yourself from the tyranny of
proposals now which is huge yeah
but this is a very very scholarly book i
mean in a popular way it's it's a
history it's
it's it's excruciatingly detailed right
um in its recreations of various moments
and characters
and uh personalities and i'm wondering
like where are all the men cards on the
quilt i mean you how how was the file
folders arranged so
what did i do
but physically what i did is i kept all
the notes in a diary physically within a
diary so i would go to archive there's a
lot of archival work here a lot of our
hardware work was being done actually
new york there's a lot of other work in
new york and i when i would go to the
archives i would physically take notes i
get photocopies smile the photocopies
away but then i keep a running diaries
in fact there there was
while this was
this was in virtual space right on the
laptop in real space what i had was a
you know
what became a lot of 600 or 800 page
running diary of nooks this is your
research note that's why this is your
lab right there's a tradition here right
so you're used to kind of keeping this
running that's right an outcome stream
of consciousness uh thought process and
it was more than human consciousness you
know there would be an article somewhere
or the other and i would have forgotten
it otherwise i would physically write
that down if i was more intelligent i
would have some system i would have to
do this on the computer i can't so i
physically write it down i would say you
know half of it loves
sting
19 circle 1940 look up page this picture
this that or the other sometimes i would
photocopy it so i have a photocopied
version of it but the photography
really i kept that to the master book um
and so that that's how i you know that's
how that's done so this is more i had to
confess that at one point when i was
reading this i guess the second time i
read it i thought you know
because i hadn't appreciated where in
your chronology this has
come and i spent a long time on it yeah
and i saw that it was the product of
something that began during your fellow
term and i thought oh you know he's his
classmates is this like you know
everything siddhartha learned about
cancer while some of it is doing his
residency you know yeah and he just
wrote it all down and now he's rewritten
it in a nice elegant way and that that's
how he did his reporting yeah
but he has a lot more going on here
you allude to it periodically oh we
tripped to go find so and so
uh
the the same
the oncologist in south africa who
committed the great fraud
thank you who yeah you actually went
looking for it um so i was surprised by
this you insert yourself periodically
very discreetly into this tax well how
long did you spend
doing this paperwork
um
i did the spade work right through there
was no point that i stopped in this
payload i mean usually and this is again
this is not going to sound like a deep
river tourism but as you know
leaders are so smart that they will
discover your discovery
they will figure out in a book when you
are actually discovering something
and when you're not when you're sort of
pulling out something from broke
knowledge
so for me usually the answer was all
almost always when i was stuck in the
book
my answer was go discover yourself
so for instance um
when i was writing about mammography
which is saying i can assure you a
a on one hand politically a very theory
topic but again
in order to humanize that in order to
put a name to a face
you not only humanize my mobile garage
on humanized mammography
um i was finding really hard going
writing about trial after trial and
failed mammography and um
my wife at that time was doing some work
at melbourne so i said you know what
i'll go to mountain of course malmo's
where is the final child
now was it important to go to malmo to
in in the history of writing but we know
but for me
to go to malcolm is very important
just one other example
and actually some of this stuff will
make it into the book
there's a section in the book but i was
very interested i talk a lot about
how crucial and how important in terms
of human knowledge
the structure of human knowledge these
trials that document the link between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer right
the invention of the prospective trial
is a very important moment in medical
history
when you follow subjects patients and
women
forward as opposed to going backwards
our biases we have very deep biases in
the collection
uh so you follow gifts forward
so that trial was invented really around
solving the link between lung cancer and
smoking so in other words if you could
take
a group of smokers and little
non-smokers and you could follow them
forward at a time and you could develop
you could watch the development of lung
cancer in one week and not in america
you could
more
convincingly proved that there was a
link behind the other
so it turned out too i was writing about
all of this and i felt really stuck in
this place tonight so i thought i would
go in and we're into the very house
physically where this was discovered
and
and then i was walking from that house i
took a walk around that vicinity it's in
global city we take a walk around in
bloomsbury out towards the london school
of tropical health if you look up
you're at the london school of tropical
health and you figure out you begin to
figure out the connections now these are
just physical connections on the
balconies of the london people visited
they're all developing with lungs for
tropical health there are
um
these uh balconies are guilded their
territory is a very beautiful dirty
they're building and there are these
sort of great
infectious diseases discoveries of the
19th century you know there's a there's
a there's a anopheles mosquito is part
of the balcony and then you walk around
the next balcony is a tsipsi fly and the
next balcony is uh
you know the carrier for colors or the
next balcony is you know something like
that
and
if you think to yourself for a second of
course what you really what you really
experienced what i really began to
experience there and i'm just physically
not thinking of the physical as well i
kept wondering you know here you are in
the 19th century and in disease is a
simple vector
these things are called vectors and
alkaline is a vector for malaria because
it carries malaria so here you're in the
19th century
these simple diseases infectious
diseases
complete mistakes but these diseases
have
identifiable vectors mosquito malaria
etc and then you come to the 20th
century things start getting so fuzzy is
the cigarette a vector
for lung cancer in the same sense that
the mosquito is a vector for malaria
and this is the discussion that's
happening really in the london school
tropical health in 1940 people are
saying these chronic diseases like lung
cancer will never have such simple
solutions there is not going to be a
mosquito for cigarette smoking there's
never going to be a ct fly for diabetes
the it's true that too many factors it's
too much it's too complicated it's just
way too complicated and just to
give you one more destination in this
journey that actually
that doesn't find its way but if you
then walk
a few more steps you find yourself on
threadneedle street
where the actuarial history the
actuarial business is beginning so this
is a time when shipping is obviously a
big importance um and if a ship sinks
then you
lose all your fortune so you find your
mechanism to
to insure yourself against that sinking
or ship and so all these insurance
agents are creating equations
to look at risk
that's what they do this is so it
doesn't take
a big
leap of genius or faith to now figure
out the connections so you have to
essentially borrow the equations from
the actual industry because they are
complex enough to capture real risk in
the real world in a complex world um in
order to now begin to understand how to
understand risk in the medical sense
right so you really have gone through if
you were to take this walk physically in
space you would have gone through a very
important structure
in between 19th century 20th century
epidemiology which is really an
important circle in between 19th century
and 20th century human anaesthetic
knowledge right starting from the
mosquitoes on the balcony to the the
actual remnants of the actuarial
industry
in
in uh your thread industry working
yourself back to where bill and blue
were working out the equations that
finally solve the link between lung
cancer smoking now
is it absolutely important for you to
take this journey for me to take this
journey to solve to tell the story of
cigarette smoking well maybe not too but
to me it was important because otherwise
i felt as if you know my own pulses
began
and i would became uninterested in what
i was writing so i said well every time
i had this kind of situation i usually
just went to travel to some place
whether it was a laboratory sometimes it
was an interview sometimes it was
finding some person
so it became a research project much
like writing
much like any laboratory dyslexia
research
so that was that's kind of generous
for the whole book you mean
so
you know page to page uh end to end it
took about five and a half years
but then there was a you know the book
like this usually requires about a six
to seven month reading period
um so
in all serious casinos we sent i sent it
out to
at least about 50 60 people uh if you're
60 people yes then you chose not to
publicly this is items yes your own uh
peer review group exactly i identified
materially which was very diverse
um statisticians you know
uh
harold warmus was one of them you know
but vogelstein
george canelos tom fry
right just everyone in the field uh so
you were very well ready before you ever
got published
uh
how did this work how did the feedback
come to you what form did you say what
are these what did this do for you in
lectures emails i would follow up with
emails saying you know and i i could
identify specific exceptions in the book
so that they wouldn't i mean i said
do read the whole book if you can but if
you're unable to do it i particularly
like it i just took a lot of work uh you
know to george canelos i would say
particularly be interested in your
thoughts about
uh the history of uh the development of
chemotherapy for hodgkin's disease and
that happens in page 442
to 446 and then also at this blah blah
blah blah blah and then
you know this is what's wonderful about
writing science scientists
really take this kind of work very
seriously and very generously so george
canelos sent me uh he doesn't use
computers so he sent me a fax saying
you know
this name would be useful to put in this
place
do acknowledge the work of john ziegler
who developed the first chemotherapy
against berkeley's lymphoma again and so
i went back and
meanwhile a publisher was tearing her
hair out because you know time was
passing and i said no no everyone has to
read um
and so then that was inserted in or he
would say you know that piece about
um
this drug is not really right as my
memory serves you look up the style of
the other so a long reading period six
or seven months reading period in which
there was a lot of sort of scholarly
feedback that i got from people
well this may be kind of opening up
something that would be interesting for
us to explore for a moment which is you
know in science and medicine you know
there's a rich publishing tradition
uh there's a rich uh
educational process to teach you to
write there's a rigorous sometimes
painful process by which
communications about experimental work
are hammered in shape
and then published and then there's what
happens on the other side of the fence
in the trade publishing world in the
world of journalism i'm wondering now
that you've kind of
can tell us a little bit about being
edited in both worlds i mean how
what's the experience like you
writing as a scientist and being peer
reviewed and edited that way
and this uh process on the other side of
the fence where you're writing for a
trade publisher who may or may not
take the trouble to actually edit your
work and then it sounds like you created
your own peer review system um tell us a
little bit more about that well so you
know a couple of thoughts about that one
is that um i um
one very important thing is that this
this peer review panel that i assembled
for myself
it was very broad
included people who are
very very very purposely to the people
who absolutely know
his
were
were general readers who was reading
it was sometimes writing i respected but
it was reading i respected more than
anything else so i i went to them and
said well what parts of the book um are
interesting to you but where do you get
stuck
and i was i listened to them very
acutely
and they're parts of the book that are
that are motivated but i need to point
out one section for instance um someone
said to me um
i'd written this blog
yeah i said it was out in review um
one very good reader said to me
well you know i i i
i just don't get married lasker
you know here's here she is um
she is sitting
in uh fellas in my life
a very interesting persona
a was born in 1900
became
involved in really transforming the
geography the landscape of american
health
she has a
very important quote in the book that
says that i'm as opposed to illness as
one might be opposed to sin
um so she was she had an evangelical
quality in in the transfer in her
english and her desire to transform
american health and she
very unusually for her time was a
philanthropist um
sorry the obviously her account was that
was a was a very prominent entrepreneur
um it was very successful as a
businesswoman uh married albert lasker
people might know from the advertising
world really launches one of the early
in one of the great advertisers of
america
he's part of the reason that we have the
the way the iconography of american and
actual world advertising works is really
important for another glasgow this idea
of what you call salesmanship and print
advertisements
information so mary alaska
mary and albert get married and then
mary chooses to take all her
philanthropic energy
and divert it towards american health uh
particularly cancer
uh phenomenally successful um and so
but the questions that this woman kept
asking me well why why is this lady who
you know is a perfectly quaffed upper
east side lady living in a perfect
apartment on ligman place with
white flowers and
a collection of monets why on earth
would she become so interested in
having the nation cure cancer
and so for me that what that meant going
back to the archives and finding the
answer and it turns out that there are
three seminal memories that mary laska
has and they're actually
her archives she talks about one memory
in which she is a child and she is if
she has a febrile
uh bacterial illness and she the only
memory is actually very evocative the
only thing she says she's a child and
the only thing she remembers is someone
saying to her mother her mother
saying sarah you'll never raise this
child
so that memory stuck with her
so that's one the second memory that she
talks about is
a memory in which she goes to her she
goes with her mother to visit her
laundress
maryland was obviously for one people
she had long dresses um
and um this laundress had has had breast
cancer this is in the 19 uh early 20th
century and has had a double mastectomy
of double radical mastectomy now again i
don't write about this in the book but
think for a second if you're a laundress
all the professions
if you're a laundress and you have a
mastectomy a radical mastectomy the most
common problem with radical mastectomy
is that they would take up the deeper
muscles of of the chest and to be alone
and the two complications one of them
that is that you have you were often not
able to move your your upper shoulders
and the second is that you often would
get
more often but occasionally you get
lymphedema very severe swelling because
your lymph nodes have been removed now
think about that as a profession
of all the professions i mean there were
many affected
trying to wash clothes um
and so so that's why i sort of spent
time thinking you know if you were a lot
if you were married lasker and you
wandered into your laundrist's house and
she had just had a double mastectomy by
barack obama to me what would that feel
like or that moment to be like and she
writes about it
and then finally of course and you can
see that you know sort of the the bells
of history clanging in the back the
third one is that she writes about uh an
illness that she has in 1918
significantly uh in which she is
confined to her bed so ill that she
thinks she's going to die and that of
course is the flu moving through
the united states the blue pandemic
moving through the united states um and
so again to answer this moment's
question you know we i have to go back
in and
add real detail to flesh out um and so
this was what the peer review process
was like um someone would say and so in
contrast
harold varmus might come back to me and
say you know
i missed uh
i missed some important character he
said you know
mary claire king is missing in this
story the woman who
hardly discovered brc one and
subsequently was involved in the
discovery of ch2 and i said you know
you're right i don't know why but she is
but you need someone you needed a
perspective like that and so yes merry
claire king had to put back into this
book because the role in history is
important so there were all these little
pieces of information that was very
bombarded by this peer review process
that came back and to me
uh at least to that part of it actually
quite resembles writing a paper a
scientific paper you get criticism
a lot of it
your first response is to say
absolutely not right you know don't
listen
but you know part of the luxury of i
think
i think
part of being a good writer and a good
scientist is to really take a deep
breath every time someone sends you some
criticism and say you know really
there's something in there
and you can get to to try to suck it up
and
incorporate those ideas if you can
sometimes
do a lot of work for magazines
you know that kind of peer review or
reader review or even source review
that is
unheard of uh
certain kinds of work and
book writing is actually
my welcome and often
really incredibly helpful it's a great
part of the process to
incorporate folks including
on a limited basis uh you know even
folks who are characters
it's just incredibly useful
there may be exceptions you know if you
have to be writing about something
that's
kind of controversial or confidential
but
generally speaking it's an incredibly
useful process
that's true book authors often complain
about
uh not getting that quality of editing
because the
look at it is increasingly in a position
where they're kind of
forced to act as acquisition editors
most of the time
but it does seem this funny thing dan
where the more ephemeral
the product the more heavily and
strictly and carefully is edited the
newspapers which last you know 24 hours
if you're lucky are intensely edited i
mean every word has gone over magazines
are very strongly edited um books
often
you know the editing is done because the
uh the author read it again before he or
she mailed it in i mean obviously i've
gotten a case like this or in
many but increasingly there's something
that both authors often complain about
yeah that's a really interesting irony
of our business
and you know the more permanent the
product often
the shoddier
so it's really important to sort of
incorporate incorporate people who are
uh on an informal basis that you may not
get
and you know the line edits to me are
were less interesting have always been
less interesting
in a book like this the really deep
insights one of them i gave you like you
know getting into the mind of something
and asking a question because obviously
you're lying it's a
it's a it's a query about internality
right what is the interior space of this
person so that was much more interesting
to me and the other kind of value that
was interesting to me is that
i talked a little bit about it before
there were two or three major
chunks that were moved around in the
book
can i tell you what they are yeah
yeah
because of chronology because the magic
issues
they have two for two separate very
separate issues um the first major chunk
that was people read the book it uh was
that carla's story the story that really
carries us through the entire book and
the cargo story is a
patient of mine who has accumulated loss
of leukemia
and will become sort of our our guide to
the book in some respects we come back
to her over and over again
now her story really began in the middle
of the book um
and so she was moved right up front
uh in order to introduce the book um
and i'll tell you why
it turned out that um
the reason uh
one thing again since i'm talking to
since this video is really a
conversation about not only about
content but about style but one thing
that's that that i'm very aware of
perhaps readers are as well is that this
book lives in its linings
um it really lives in between in the
connection because there's so much of
physical and temporal space that's been
covered really four thousand years with
two hundred dollar character that's been
represented being covered
really in order to tell the story in a
reasonable narrative way
it really lives in the linings between
between individuals and between spaces
i'll give you a couple of examples
there's a moment in the book
when um
when i'm telling carter about her first
remission it's a very important moment
in the history of any person's leukemia
the first emission very important goal
and karla reaches that milestone um it
happens in i'd probably find this space
but anyway
so carla reaches that first remission
and i and i tell her this news while i'm
standing physically
a few doors away from where sydney
parker first discovered chemotherapy
right
and
that is the moment of course uh when i
introduced the fact that sidney parker's
life man was in 1973.
so
that is a it's a it's a lining because
you go now from sidney farber's death in
right back and you jump back or forward
in this case to 2005 and really the only
connection between them is the fact that
i'm physically standing in the same
space where
this thing was discovered this drug was
discovered and this drug although it's
created and has died in this case the
department has died has allowed this
woman to have her first remission right
now
it's a very complicated series of
relationships but they're all pivoted on
the fact that i'm standing at that exact
same site i'm standing right there and
therefore you as i really believe me
that i've actually created
or allowed me to go and move as a like a
wormhole through space in time so that's
one example there are many many such
examples when you read the book you
realize you know it turns out for
instance someone turns out to be
someone's uncle
right matthew baby's uncle was joking
was john hunter again you know they're
physically separated in time and space
but that little connection between them
allows us to move the story from one
generation to the next generation and to
me it seemed to be a more seamless
manner so that's what i meant about